I would take the material from the horse that was
recently born and then, you know, work on
developing cell lines. And I developed a few cell
lines from that, primary cell cultures. Then I
worked on developing some leukocytes, some cell
cultures from leukocytes. And that's what my
thesis had to do with, part of my thesis had to do
with developing a leukocyte cell culture system.
All right. Now, how many years of coursework did
you take? Oh, let's see. I took two years. Two
years. Yeah. And was there a time, was there an
official process where you submitted a thesis
proposal and it was approved by? Yeah, but I pretty
well did that my first year. So no hang-ups there?
Really, I didn't have any hang-ups whatsoever
with my studies, contrary to what happens a lot of
time these days. I pretty well knew what I wanted to
do. I was pretty well guided into... I was given a
lot of freedom to do whatever I wanted to do, but it
was pretty well structured. Now, who were the
people that were most positive in their
encouragement of what you were working on? Gee,
just about everybody I came in contact with out
there at Haskell. I mean, as I say, that's the
fortunate thing about this. Well, Wayne Moore, of
course, was primary. Now, you may want to delete
this, but Wayne had a lot of emotional problems
later on. In fact, I think he's in an institution
now. Well, I tried to. He's a real bright, he was a
real bright person, but he was, he had a few hangups
about- Who did you say was- Oh, I'm sorry. Wayne,
Leland Grumbles was my chairman. All right, yeah.
Now, did you go by at any regular pace to keep him
posted on what the progress you were making? As a
matter of fact, I didn't have to. quite often I
would go by and say, you know, I wonder what this,
how this would work. Or I would say, you know, he
didn't, you know, he ran a, he ran the department,
he had an open-door policy, at least for me. I never
had any problem in visiting with him at all. And so I
would go by and say, I wonder how this would work. Or
I'd say, you know, I got this idea. And, you know, it
was a, I guess you'd say a Socrates-like situation
where... What were some of the... Well, I didn't
have any problems meeting, I mean, I just didn't
feel that there were any deadlines. Were there any
steps that you remember, oh, I was glad when I did
this and this? Yeah. Well, actually, as I look back
over, I mean, at the time, you mean I was glad that I
did this and I wish that I'd done something other
than this yeah oh there have been times the from the
broad picture there have been times when I when I
regretted not having gone on to medical school no I
mean on your in your research oh in my oh okay yeah oh
yeah yeah lord there was I mean uh see I was
collecting tissues for example I was collecting
tissues from from a pretty dirty source, trying to
make cell cultures out of them. And I'd get a
beautiful culture of fungus and bacteria and not a
culture of cell culture, you know. And a lot of
times, I mean, I had the, I thought that these
leukocyte cells, I thought that, man, I thought
that's the, this organism or this, you know, this
virus, I felt fairly certain was one that infected
leukozytes, and later on it's found to be that. And
so I had hoped that I'd be able to develop this
leukozyte cell culture line and then take it over
there to the electron microscope and look at it and
see it, and time after time after time I'd take it
over there and I wouldn't see a damn thing. And so
many times I'd get these cells going and they
wouldn't grow and, you know, that
sort of thing. There's several of those kind of
instances. I tried to incubate, put the things in a
common method for isolating viruses is to use
inbreeding eggs, chicken eggs. And you'll
inoculate the chicken eggs in there. Well, I don't
know, I didn't know at the time. First of all, I
didn't know for sure I was dealing with the virus
because I couldn't see it. I didn't have a good
system for culturing it, and so I was really sort of
playing blind. And I was beginning to wonder
really if I had made an error in selecting this as a
problem because it looked like I wasn't gonna get
to an endpoint. Cuz if I couldn't show the virus, I
couldn't, I was really frustrated over that. But
there was an element in it that- When did you know
that you were going to be able to reach a successful
conclusion with that project? When I started
seeing the virus under the electron microscope.
Okay, and that took about how many months or years?
No, it took about eight months, eight or nine
months. And then- Well, there was another element
to the project. See, this disease, it cycles. So I
had kind of the wild idea that this cycling, this
fever and so forth, was associated with
something, some destruction of cells or
production of something that is unusual to the
host and so I started looking for a protean or a
component and that's when I was I was trying to
visit with with Mac Prescott about this and I and so
I had the theory that an abnormal protean was
involved in this and so I started trying to isolate
it and I used column chromatography and
electrophoresis and sure enough did isolate a
component that was it now is recognized there's a
immune globulin is referred to as gamma globulin
you know it's it now you can recognize it as an
abnormal immune globulin
while there may have been literature on that at the
time I'm not aware I wasn't aware of it and I'm still
not aware of it being available being around at
that time at any rate when I saw the virus and when I
this this hypothesis kind of kind of fell into
place that I'm dealing with that the disease is
associated with with the virus number one and that
it's associated with an abnormal protean number
two that's when boy that was ecstasy because I was
really you know I really felt like I was in and as a
matter of fact Wayne was working was working with a
procedure for screening for EIA based upon a
serologic technique that that we found out later
was based upon that abnormal protein and
subsequently we didn't publish that see we were
just playing in the lab and subsequently someone
His name was Charles Coggins. He may have been from
Missouri. I'm not sure where he was from, but
anyway, he developed what's called the Coggins
test, and that's the standard test. Even today,
that's the standard test for screening for this
disease. All right. Do you remember going into
somebody and saying, I found it, I found it? Oh,
yeah. Yeah, and of course Wayne was, yeah, we were,
I said, we,
Wayne was not a person to use hells and dams and that
sort of thing, but when I showed him those ems of the
agent, and he said,
I said, we're there. We've got it, man. All right,
now, so you finished your dissertation. Finished
the dissertation. What year? How many years?
Well, let's see, I went there in 64, 60, the summer,
the fall of 66. So the third year? Third year, yeah.
Third year. And I came on the staff in 67. Now...
Of course, you know. What was your first academic
title? I was a research associate first. First,
and then? And then I became assistant professor
the following fall. I was a research associate in
June of 67, and then in the fall. All right, now this
will be the last dollar question. Do you remember
what your salary was when you became assistant
professor? Yeah. Let's see. It seemed like it was
$15,000. And by then, had you decided yes or no
about medical school? Well, I was really
comfortable. I really felt comfortable, but I
was, you know, I still had a, I got to know several of
the physicians around town, and I, you know, I got
to thinking, gosh, I'd like to be doing what those
guys are doing, but But then, and also I had some
people from Plum Island, the lab in Plum Island,
which has to do with animal diseases, had
contacted me, invited me up to, and this is just out
of the blue, invited me up to talk about my EIA work
and that sort of thing. But, yeah, I was still
thinking about medical school, but I still... I
was aware of the fact that I had two children and
another one on the way, and we still weren't, I
didn't explore the possibilities. There
probably were a number of
financial assistantships, but that went further
and further back in my mind. When you joined the
department as an assistant professor, were you
the only one without a DVM? Well,
shortly afterwards, Jim Grimes followed me, and
he was the other one. Okay. But we sort of set, you
know, there weren't any at that time. Did anybody
ever... Yep, yep, yep, yep. Quite often,
sometimes. Not a lot of times. Was it always
teasing or sometimes serious? No, sometimes
pretty serious. You know, you can't really be
doing that sort of thing because you're not a
practitioner. Or you can't be making those kind of
statements because you're not a practitioner.
You can't culture those birds like that because
only, I think you just said, you don't know what
you're talking about. All right, but there, yeah,
there was a lot of, not a lot, but there was some of
that sort of thing. Yeah, this is 67. About how many
faculty were in veterinary microbiology then?
Let's see. Archie Flowers, there was about...
Seven. Seven. And Leland Grumbles was the
chairman. And were there any, was the College of
Veterinary Medicine going through any kinds of
trauma or? Yeah, as a matter of fact, in, let's see,
in 69, the first time that the vet school came up for
accreditation while I was there, and I believe
that was in 69, it looked like that Al Price was
going to have to step down. Because they were, the
vet school was kind of under the gun. Let's
see,
Texas Tech was also wanting to be a vet school, and
Governor-
Preston Smith, from Lubbock. From Lubbock, was
really pressing to make it. So these things kind of
really put a lot of pressure on the
administration. I mean, you know, I was just sort
of a bystander, but, you know, the possibility of
another vet school, the problems I'm not sure
where there's a, I don't know the details on the
accreditation issue because I wasn't in the
thing, but there was some concern about
accreditation at that time. And there was some
concern about Al as a, whether he'd been there long
enough or that maybe it was time for him to move on. I
don't know what, and I'm not, that was all hearsay
at that time, so of the situation, but there was a
lot of turmoil. By then, were there some women in
that school? In 69, I believe it was 69, the first
woman came in. Do you remember? Yes. Do I remember
anything? Yes, yes. What was it like when the first
women came? Well, actually, well,
the young lady's name was Sonya.
Gosh, I can't remember her last name. When you
think of it, let me know. I will, yeah. Because I'd
love to interview her. She would be excellent to,
yeah. What was it really like? Yeah, that would be a
good one to, she would be a good one to interview.
What did the faculty in general think about
female? Whoa, whoa. Some of those people that you
have listed on that list right there were really
opposed. In your estimation, if there had been a
secret ballot, what would the vet faculty have
voted? They would not have. They would have voted
no? Yeah. What about black students? We didn't
have any black students at all. What would they, if
they had voted no? what would they have felt about
admitting blacks to vet school? Oh, definitely
not. There's a kind of a sick story about that
issue. Let's see, this was 67. You know, we had
departmental faculty meetings on a weekly basis.
And one of the faculty members who held a joint
appointment in another, in the animal science
department, made a, to me, a very distasteful
comment. And I'm saying this because this kind of
gives you the flavor of the times, and it probably
was throughout much of the saddle.
When Martin Luther King was doing his thing about,
you know, He said, I heard one of those guys said
that that negro is gonna get all us niggers killed.
And boy, a
lot of people laughed over that. And there were
some of us that were really disgusted with that
situation. And I don't really know why we had You
know, in Roton, Texas, the people, now that's not
true now, I'm sure, but people in Roton, Texas were
very biased. And I don't know why I'm not. or why I
was not, but I wasn't. This just really bothered
me. So that kind of gives you the black students,
black applicants would not have made it at that
time, in my opinion. How long was it before you had a
female in one of your sections? Well, you see, I
was, I was not teaching. I was not actually
involved in teaching for the first few years that I
was there. Describe your duties. I was, well, one
of the first things I did was to write a grant for, I
was involved in grant writing, and that's, that
was kind of the thing I did. Was it, did someone make
it clear to you that part of your future would
depend on your ability to get grants? No, I never
felt that. It probably did, but I never felt that
way, and in fact, I never, Strangely enough,
Haskell, that environment has always been
nurturing to me.
It's positive and I really, with a few exceptions
of, you're not a DVM, you're not a veterinarian,
you can't do that sort of thing. But most of the time
there wasn't that sort of thing. But let's see,
I've lost my train of thought now. We were talking
about, My research, yeah. I mean, where I was
supposed to get. No, that wasn't something that I
had to do. It's just something I kind of enjoyed
doing. And so my first effort didn't have anything
to do with EIA. It had to do with microbiology. And I
wrote a grant that Wayne was into swine in a big way.
And I put together, actually Ghost wrote it,
because he was better known than I. He was the
principal investigator, but I wrote the grant for
him. We explored the possibility of the impact of
various dietary components on the intestinal
microflora of swine.
role of those microbes in in bile acid metabolism
bile and and the significance of that has to do with
atherosclerosis in cardiovascular diseases so
we wrote a we wrote one of the bigger grants at that
time to explore the role of of diet high high high
lipid high uh high glucose and that sort of thing
the impact on the intestinal microflora with the
implication that that those changes in the
microflora now this was for how much do you
remember the grant I believe it was two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars from NIH NIH yeah well we
had some we had some ultimately we had some pretty
pretty powerful horses on it we well again you know
I was I've been real lucky. One of the individuals
at Baylor Medical School at the Department of
Microbiology had been with me in the Army. And so I
called him and told him this is what we were doing.
He said, that's a great idea. I said, yeah, we'd
like to cooperate with you. And then I told Wayne.
And so he contacted him, and then the Department of
Pathology there got interested in it. And so we had
a pretty strong relationship. you know,
collaborative effort between Baylor Med School
and us on that project. And that project lasted how
long? Three years. Three years? Yeah. One of the
things that kind of gave rise to, see, I was doing
that, let's see, I started doing that, I guess we
were working on that in 68, the year after I got
there, and we we had to house the the pigs in a
particular you know we had to kind of keep them
clean so me and this other guy not Gordon but
another guy in the in the department uh we're going
to be working on that project and we failed to
incorporate enough money I mean there's plenty of
money there salaries and that sort of thing
supplies but we failed to incorporate enough
money in there to to for the holding pins for the
pigs so we had to build the damn things and we made
them out of concrete and we we designed them and
they they were they were you know they were uh you
know a pig pen again i'm not i'm not i don't know very
didn't know but then and still don't know very much
about pigs about right rearing pigs but we built a
some concrete uh made them out of concrete, and
made it so that the droppings went into the pen
itself. It had its self-watering in this pen,
essentially their own, to make a long story short,
their own sewerage system, which we really
thought, and it was a pretty good idea. We built
those things, and we spent all of one summer and
part of a fall building those things. But we built
them, and we said that, you know, maybe other
things will get torn down but these pig pens are
going to be here for the and they are they are still
there where are they located they're located in on
what is now a veterinary research park and they're
north part they're right next to the where the USDA
building is fairly close to where the USDA you said
you all built them you mean you all actually we
actually got out the physical labor yes sir yes sir
we because we didn't have the we we hadn't hadn't
didn't have the funds to do it and At that time, they
were doing a lot of, as I say, Polorum testing, and
there was one lady from Caldwell that really
didn't, you know, she would drive in from Caldwell
and then go back and didn't really have much
contact with the university community. So she
came up to me one day and said, Don,
I just got my PhD. I said, Don, what does PhD stand
for? And just out of the blue, I said, well, I won't,
well, I will. Ms. Fick was her name, but that's
neither here nor there. I said, well, Ms. Fick,
actually, Ph.D., you know what Mr. Thomas and I are
doing. We're building these pig pens, and so Ph.D.
actually stands for pig house designer. and I
guess from that day forward she knew that she felt
like the PhD meant pig house designer but that's
you know so we built those pens and did that work and
we spent three years and and I guess about 200 you
know whatever it was
we didn't see a correlation between Microflora
and diet and that sort of thing. And about that
time,
kind of where we got the idea, and
we were also involved with NASA, you know. We
helped to design the lunar receiving lab, you
know, when they were bringing back the moon rocks
and that sort of thing.
myself and one other person over in plant
sciences. Well, at that time I had started doing
some work with with aquatic animals and I'd been
doing some work with the microflora of swine and
they were going to be bringing back they didn't
know what the microflora, the makeup of the
bacteria might be, whether or not there might. And
so they wanted some real
high containment facilities. And there weren't
class three, those things weren't anywhere in the
picture at that time. So we were consultants to
NASA to help design the holding facilities for
quail, I was getting interested in fish at that
time too. And that's the connection because one of
the persons in Galveston had mentioned my name.
And
we designed the part of the holding facilities at
the lunar receiving and did some of the testing,
which of course was ludicrous. The rocks were
sterile and kind of figured they'd be sterile.
What was it like to work with NASA? How were they?
Well, like a real high efficiency machine. I mean,
they really had everything laid out. It was a stark
contrast to what we had here. We had meetings once a
week. We had updates on whatever.
It operated much like what I would think a
commercial
industrial drug company, kind of high pressure
type stuff. And when you work for NASA, they
have to screen you medically. You can't get your
physicals here, you had to be screened medically
down there. And they were having a meeting, the
first meeting we were supposed to be going to. We
were supposed to make a presentation and that sort
of thing, talk about what we were interested in
doing and how we thought things could. And I
thought I would couple my physical while I was down
there. and so I had been playing tennis the
afternoon before I went down there and then I got a
call from from them to tell me to have me come down
there right away to do some sort of a well it was a
glucose test but it was you know some blood testing
I went down there in my tennis shoes thinking that
I'd and forgot that I hadn't brought any other
shoes along with me. So here in this sort of formal
structured meeting, I was wearing my tennis shoes
and sort of an informal type
coat, informal type dress there. And that was kind
of an embarrassing situation, but I survived it.
All right, did that lead to any other NASA-related
research? Well, I had an opportunity, yeah, it was
really not of a major portion. I got a small grant to
about $10,000 to look at, again, to further
explore the microflora of animals that are
maintained in a in a closed sterile environment.
We didn't have any great breakthroughs on that
study either. The
one on pigs, you said you all found no relationship
with the problem. All right, was the fact that that
did not answer the situation was that a plus or a
minus for you as a researcher in terms of your
future? Oh I
didn't I don't know it's sort of neutral I don't
know that it impacted impacted me one way or the
other because it was just kind of a wild you know
it's kind of an idea As far as me personally is
concerned, I think the fact that we studied it to
begin with gave me some recognition with NIH. But I
didn't pursue that endeavor beyond the small
studies that I did with- Then keep going forward,
what's next? Okay, well,
and here I get to, I'll introduce John Calhoun.
There was an announcement that came around saying
that Texas A&M was interested in becoming a sea
grant institution, much the same way that it was a
land grant institution. And Leland brought up
that issue in one of the.